>> Brian Holt: That's foreign keys,
let's get into aggregation.
So, you've probably
seen this query before.
It's one of the most
common ones you'll run.
What if you just wanna know how many
tracks we have in our database?
>> Brian Holt: You have this thing called
an aggregation function, which is count.
Count star, as you might guess, is just
count how many things are that, you know,
are in this database and
give me back the number.
So, in our database we have 3,503 tracks.
As you might imagine, you're able to count
how many DISTINCT things you have in
the database like DISTINCT values.
You can count how many things
are greater than a hundred.
You can give it a bunch of
different aggregation things.
Let's do DISTINCT.
So, we're gonna do SELECT COUNT.
There's no space there, it doesn't matter.
But DISTINCT GenreId
FROM Track.
So, basically,
we went into the Track database, and
we counted how many different,
DISTINCT means different,
in this particular case, different
values of GenreId that I have, right?
Now I could have also done
SELECT COUNT star from genre, right?
That would also give you the same thing.
But we could also do ArtistId.
That might actually be interesting.
I don't know what that's gonna be.
There is no known Track.
You have to do album ID and join anyway.
Never mind, we couldn't do AlbumId.
So, 347, how many
things do we have in Album?
Is it the same number?
It is, that's kind of interesting, right?
But now what if we do artist?
We have 275 artists, and
we do SELECT DISTINCT Album ArtistId,
nope, that's not what I wanted to do.
Yeah, no, it is.
ArtistId from Album.
Is that the same number?
It's not,
which is kind of interesting, right?
So, we have 275 artists.
However, we only ever see 204
referenced from the album table,
which implies the fact that we
have 71 artists without albums,
kind of interesting, right?
So, that's what DISTINCT does.
You can also just do
SELECT DISTINCT GenreId from Track, and
this will actually give you the whole set,
right?
So, we have,
as you might imagine, 1 to 25.
And again, if you don't do DISTINCT,
it's gonna give you multiple
copies of everything, right?
So, if I do GenreId, how many copies
of everything that I'm getting, right?
There's a lot of sevens.
I'm gonna guess seven is probably rock,
right?
So, DISTINCT basically says, collapse this
down so, I only have one value per row.
Yeah, Mark.
>> Mark: What happens with count if
you have a column that contains nulls?
>> Brian Holt: That's a good question.
>> Brian Holt: Well, if you're just doing
count star, it's gonna count them, right?
Cuz there's still rows, right?
As long as it's in the results set,
it doesn't matter.
If you're doing a DISTINCT, my thought,
and I think I'm right here,
is that it'll count null
as just a distinct value,
cuz it is a distinct value, right?
So, if we had 1 through 25 and
null, right?
We would get 26 because null would be
an additional distinct value in there,
that's my thought.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, cool.
>> Brian Holt: So, what if we wanna
see which genre has the most,?
Seems like a pretty
reasonable question to ask.
We can do SELECt GenreId and
then COUNT(GenreId).
When you do these aggregation functions,
you'll frequently say like AS count or
something like that.
This is just aliasing it to
be called something else.
And it doesn't really matter for
what we're doing here because
we're not actually gonna be referencing
that column later, but in your code,
you don't wanna reference
the column name as this.
You wanna reference it as count, right?
>> Brian Holt: Up to you to do whatever
you want, this is totally valid.
But in code,
I would alias it to be something else.
From Track, and then you're
gonna do a GROUP BY GenreId.
So, you can see 7 has 579.
And you can see 1, whatever 1 is,
maybe that's rock is has 1300.
And 25,
there is only one track that has genre 25.
Still not super useful, cuz what is 25?
Now, I'm deadly curious.
I don't remember.
What is it?
Well, what are we gonna do if we
have something that is referenced in
another table?
Join [INAUDIBLE] We're gonna join them,
right?
So,
>> Brian Holt: Let's do it.
So, I'll just modify this one a bit.
We're gonna have to make it reference.
So, it's gonna be Track.GenreId.
There we go,
we're gonna put a Genre Name and
then we're gonna do Track.
This actually doesn't matter.
You can say Track.GenreId or
you can do Genre.GenreId.
I think you can actually even omit it
since it's not ambiguous, but don't.
Please just give it a table.
Then from Track JOIN Genre ON
Genre.GenreId = Track.GenreId.
GROUP BY Track, or Genre.GenreId,
it doesn't matter cuz they're
the same thing, okay?
>> Brian Holt: There's one Track of opera,
and rock was 1, that was wrong.
Latin was seven.
>> Brian Holt: Kinda cool, right?
You're now data scientists.
I'm just kidding.
Well, not really, I mean,
this is a lot of what
being a data scientist is.
They probably do a little bit more
complicated [LAUGH] Queries than this,
but sometimes not.
I will say that I get by with a lot of
times not having a data scientist because
I can do basic queries like this, right?
Not being afraid of SQL is actually
kind of a superpower for a developer.
>> Brian Holt: Cool,
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, and
we're using COUNT because I'm gonna
say that count is usually
the most common one used.
You're gonna use that one a lot.
But there's definitely others.
What if, instead of saying we
wanna see how many tracks,
we wanna see the highest Track ID for
every genre?
I don't know why that's useful,
but it could be.
Instead of saying COUNT,
you would just say MAX, right?
And you need to do Track ID, not GenreId,
because that would be silly.
It doesn't make any sense.
Track.Track ID
>> Brian Holt: So,
you can see the highest rock is 3,355.
That's the highest ID
that it has on the table.
Which one is the lowest?
Yeah, heavy metal,
they stopped after 1304, Bossa Nova, 660.
Rock and Roll, 122.
And again, you probably guessed but
you can also do a MIN.
>> Brian Holt: Right?
And so, the first thing in
the table is an ACDC song.
We saw that already, so it is one.
But there's only one opera song and
it's 3451.
>> Brian Holt: So, again,
these are called aggregation functions.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, I'm gonna
scroll down here a little bit, and
we're gonna talk about HAVING
>> Brian Holt: So,
what is wrong with this query right here?
So, we're selecting Track GenreId,
Genre.Name, and
the count of how many Track IDs or
genres for
each track there is from Genre,
from Track, JOIN, Genre.
And then we're giving it a WHERE COUNt
where the count of the GenreId is greater
than 500 cuz I only wanna see things that
have 500 or more in the database, right?
I don't wanna see opera that only has one.
Why does this WHERE clause not work?
It is kinda confusing.
Where works on the result set, right?
So, it's gonna run, basically this SELECT,
and it's gonna go grab all
of the rows that match the things
that we're not aggregating, right?
So, all the genre IDs and the names.
And you're gonna have in
this particular case,
you're gonna grab every
item in the database.
So, it's 3503,
I think is what we saw it was, right?
Then the WHERE clause is then going to
go rip out all of the things
that don't match that.
What's the problem here is that
we haven't aggregated yet, right?
So, we haven't collapsed
everything down yet.
So, we can't filter based on TrackId
because we don't have the count yet.
We haven't filtered out
all the things yet.
So, this won't work because that only
applies to the original results set and
not the aggregated set.
This is the only time where
I think the grammar is
important of what order things operated.
So, there's basically a second HAVING,
if you will, or
a second WHERE, called halving.
So, instead of doing WHERE,
you do HAVING at the end.
And that will filter based on the
aggregated set not the initial result set.
Does that make sense?
And it's actually important
because you can have a WHERE and
you can have a HAVING at the same time,
right?
You can filter down to
a smaller initial result set,
aggregate based on that, and
then filter based on that aggregated set.
So, that's why you have to have both,
because they are actually
different things.
You're filtering in different places, and
it makes a difference on
where you're filtering, yeah.
>> Student 1: You could
do this as a subquery?
>> Brian Holt: You could
definitely do this as a subquery.
We're gonna talk about
subqueries perhaps even next.
>> Student 1: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah.
Like programming,
there's many ways to go about doing this,
and I just invite you,
999 times out of 1,000,
go with the way that
makes the most sense and
is the most readable because most
databases are extremely fast.
So, yeah, I'm showing you how to
do this with HAVING and JOINS.
I won't show you necessarily how
to do this with subqueries, but
you could definitely do this
a couple of other ways.
>> Student 2: So, is the important part
that it's the same count in the select and
HAVING or is that just coincidence,
like the Track.GenreId?
Is it important that it matches
in the SELECT and the HAVING?
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, I mean, what actually
would be a better way of writing this?
I mean, let's just run it,
just so you can see what it is.
That's the result there.
Again, if I was just writing this for
myself
>> Brian Holt: Way clearer, right?
Yeah, that's why,
AS is super helpful here.
>> Brian Holt: But yeah,
you cannot reference
anything aggregated in the where clause.
That's the rule for
you to hold on to in your brain.
If you're doing any sort of COUNT,
MAX, MIN, any of that kind of
aggregation stuff, DISTINCT is
another one sometimes, depends.
I guess even still,
if you're doing DISTINCT,
you're gonna reference what
happens in the GROUP BY.
I mean the GROUP BYs actually ends up
being really important here, right?
Because that's actually what you're
gonna be collapsing back down on to.